you're listening to the Joey Swagman
podcast here's your host Joe Walker
ladies and gentlemen boys and girls
Swagman and swagets welcome back to the
show it has been a while I feel like I
was saying that only a little over six
months ago after my last Hiatus as with
the last Hiatus work responsibilities
have kept me from podcasting up a storm
but it's wonderful to now be back in the
saddle running and hosting this podcast
is a singular privilege and so much fun
as I think you're going to be able to
tell from the next few conversations I
will be releasing this episode
represents the beginning of season six
of the show and our first episode of
2022. this year my goal is to publish 20
Timeless podcast episodes maybe more we
shall see some housekeeping items before
I introduce this episode first to
everyone who has emailed or Twitter DM
to me while I've been on break thank you
for your patience I hope to reward it
second there has still been some great
activity on the podcast front even
though I haven't been publishing
episodes recently I have a revamped
website and a huge thanks Izzo to the
wonderful Pete Hatchery for this you can
view the website at the jspod.com and
there you can view episodes transcripts
and sign up for my weekend newsletter
which has continued going out every
weekend even during my podcast hiatuses
I've also set up a new studio for
in-person podcast recordings I recorded
my first conversation there on the 9th
of April you can check out pictures of
the studio on Twitter my handle is at
Joseph and Walker
finally and as always I love when you
write in with ideas or to discuss
episodes or things I've shared in my
weekend newsletter I've really enjoyed
hearing from listeners over the past six
months and many such interactions have
turned into real life catch-ups projects
and Partnerships I'm very lucky to have
such a smart thoughtful and open-minded
audience and another one of my goals
this year is to try to meet more of you
in person including through some live
events as well if you ever want to get
in touch with me you can reach me at Joe
at the jspod.com
let me introduce this episode which I've
titled against bayesianism this episode
is basically about prediction what kinds
of predictions are illegitimate what
kinds of legitimate and where Bayesian
updating is appropriate this is not an
episode about Bayes theorem a wonderful
tool that I use intuitively almost every
day the theorem named after one of its
progenitors the Reverend Thomas Bays I
say one of because LaPlace actually
discovered it independently and
developed it into the form we use today
tells you how to update a prior belief
in light of new information it's
straightforward and fairly well known it
goes like this the probability of a
given B is equal to the probability of B
given a multiplied by the probability of
a over the probability of B this episode
is not about that rule rather it's about
taking up that rule as a hammer and
seeing too many things including
scientific theories As Nails it's a
podcast about bayesianism applied to
scientific theories bayesianism holds
that in the words of my guest rational
credences that is degrees of belief obey
the probability calculus and that
science is a process of finding theories
with high rational credences given the
observations applied to decision making
bayesianism is to quote Ken binmore the
doctrine that Bayesian decision theory
is always rational whether in philosophy
or macroeconomics science or decision
making Bayes rule rules but in this
episode my guest attempts to Dethrone
bayesianism my guest is David Deutsch a
British physicist at the University of
Oxford David is widely regarded as the
father of quantum Computing he's also
the author of two books the fabric of
reality published in 1997 and the
beginning of infinity published in 2011.
their extraordinary zany brilliant books
their popular science books but they're
more more than that if you haven't read
them they would be close to the top of
my reading list for a generalist slash
Optimist interested in the world of
ideas and in improving the real world
both are remarkable for the fact that as
many others have have observed they make
original contributions to epistemology
while being popular science books
it might seem like a quaint Indulgence
to be discussing epistemology in the
philosophy of science at a time when
Russia is visiting destruction upon
Ukraine
and the prospect of a great power
conflict feels more Salient than at any
point in the last few decades
but this podcast is really about
progress and how to create it progress
scientific technological economic may
seem like an obvious good but there is a
growing counterculture hostile to it I'm
publishing this conversation now
precisely because of not despite the
horrors of current affairs because I've
never been more convinced that progress
is the only thing keeping us from
stumbling sooner or later into the abyss
I hope you enjoy the conversation
[Music]
David Deutsch welcome to the podcast
thanks for having me I wanted to focus
in particular today on prediction and
the types of predictions that we can
make legitimately I'd like to begin with
a bit of context I was hoping you could
tell me about Charles Parkin and how he
led you to Karl Popper
oh Charlie Parkin yes well he he was my
um
tutor as they call him in Cambridge
which is misleading because tutors do
anything except teach
uh so it's it's uh I think that in
Oxford they used to call them moral
tutor but even that is misleading it's
basically a a member of the college
whose job it is to kind of connect with
with the particular students that
they're assigned to and like be on their
side like if if they have some problem
with the bureaucracy or with the
University or with the college then you
would kind of if you're in trouble or or
just if you need something you would go
to the tutor and there was a thing that
that
um you're supposed to go and see your
tutor
um at the beginning and end of each term
to kind of check in with them and you
know there they check that you're not on
drugs and stuff you know like that and I
never had anything to say to my tutor
and he was a historian and which is was
was not now but was then pretty far from
my interests so I um
uh on one occasion
I had written this essay just for myself
because I'd read
um Bertrand Russell's history of Western
philosophy and another book and I was
really taken with this idea of
philosophy of science and I thought you
know I'm I want to be a physicist and I
want to do it right and you know so so I
wrote this article about how
um it's important to to do induction
right as it says in in Bertrand Russell
and I sent this to Charlie Parkins so
that we would have something to talk
about when I would see him and
um and he said I remember this very well
he said
um induction
um uh hasn't that been proved wrong by
that popper chappie
um well
I'd only heard of popper once before
which is from my mathematics teacher in
school but I know I'd never followed up
anything and so
I I said oh well you know I didn't know
um he said induction is old hat now uh
so I I thought well if it's old hat I
need to know what new hat is so I went
out and and bought a pop-up book
um and and that was the beginning of
beginning of um a complete change of
course in my philosophical life and I
believe you actually met popper right
can you tell me what that was like yes
uh I met Papa once unless you count or
one of his lectures that I went to
um uh where I didn't meet him personally
so I only met him personally once I I'm
I met
um I I went to his home with
um
my my boss Bryce DeWitt
who also wanted to meet Papa
and
um uh we went to his home and uh we
mainly wanted to tell him that
um although his philosophy was you know
amazing groundbreaking
he'd got
um quantum theory completely wrong and
he hadn't even understood what the
problem was let alone what the solution
was and the solution was uh Everett's
Multiverse interpretation or so-called
interpretation is it's a everettian
quantum theory as we now prefer to call
it
um and he just rejected that out of hand
again for rather silly reasons
so we we uh we discussed many things
with him but but among other things we
got around to discussing Everett and we
explained it to him you know what the
problem really was and uh what he got
wrong and he listened incredibly
carefully asked all the right questions
uh you know we'd been told he's
intellectually very arrogant and he he
he uh shouts down opposition and so on
and none of that we we found him
incredibly you know papyrian in in his
in his attitude to ideas
and at the end he said uh well uh I've
got a book in print now and and I'm
gonna have to change one of the chapters
something like that I'm going to have to
make a radical change to something I
forget what it was
and uh we thought wow you know we've
we've kind of succeeded but then when
that book came out and I forget actually
which book it was he wrote several that
mentioned quantum theory
but it it had none of that in it it it
was all back
to his original View
so I guess he must have changed his mind
uh whereas In the Heat of the Moment
he'd he thought we had a point but then
thought no no they don't have a point so
um that was my my one and only meeting
with Papa
yeah did he show any engagement with the
idea or he just completely engaged over
it yes oh no in in the book that he
subsequently uh no no
as far as I remember anyway the the only
mentions are asides and they were rather
disparaging
right so why was encountering popper
such a pivotal moment in your
intellectual development
um
it's hard to
it's hard to express
exactly why but
um for me personally psychologically
I had uh my idea of philosophy and the
philosophy of science and what
philosophy is for and what it can do and
so on
um like when I was in school and an
undergraduate at first uh it was really
the the
everyday view of philosophy and and when
I read
um Russell
it was again the common sense view
because induction is common sense you
know if we see the sunrise every day
then then we think it's gonna rise the
following day as well you know is that
that kind of thing but if we see it not
rise then we know that there's something
wrong with our theory that it'll rise
every day
uh and that's what I thought that's what
Russell thought
and then
when I read Papa
I saw that Not only was that wrong
but it took philosophy itself to a whole
new level it's it's like this is
seriously this is uh serious
um thinking about about what the truth
of the of the matter really is
and so it was the seriousness of popper
which first got me
rather than the content and it took me
actually several years I mean I've been
trying to think back from time to time
how long it took me before the time when
I would say yes I'm a papyrian to the
time when I actually got it I think it
was about four years and several more
Papa books
when you say the seriousness of popper
what makes someone serious in that
respect
uh well it's again it's very hard to
describe in words but it's it's
following ideas through
um
and insisting that things make sense so
the the trouble with the theory of
induction is that if if you follow
through any strand of like how can this
be
you end up with a problem namely that it
doesn't make sense that the philosophers
call this the problem of induction
uh like the original problem of
induction was uh
um we we see all these instances of
things like sunrises and we here we
infer that the sun is going to rise
again but that inference is not
logically valid so logic had been
developed to quite a high degree already
in Antiquity by Aristotle and and people
and then even Aristotle already realized
that this kind of inference is just not
a valid inference it doesn't follow
and uh that then you know people tried
various ideas okay maybe it's not
logically valid but there's another form
of reasoning which you can call
inductive reasoning and that somehow
makes sense and that every attempt to
make that make sense didn't work either
and and then uh then I realized that you
know this whole problem
is a misconception because it's just not
true that the future is like the past
um you know the the the there's one
thing about the future
and this may come into prediction if you
want to talk about that later
um is that it's not like the past it's
never like the past and then well the
inductivists might say well yeah but
it's like the past in some ways and it's
it's different from the past in other
ways so it's approximately like the past
and you know so none of that works and
what Papa did was he said okay
uh what are the assumptions that lead to
this so-called problem I.E this
so-called refutation sorry this this
refutation of the whole Theory what are
the
um
assumptions behind it
which one of which one or more of which
must be false
and uh so he took seriously that there
is something wrong with our theory of
not our theory of just scientific
knowledge but our theory of what
knowledge is
and
knowledge had traditionally been thought
again since Antiquity been thought of as
what was later called Justified true
belief
so it's a kind of belief knowledge is a
kind of belief and it's true
and uh it is Justified and then you you
can also modify that by saying it's it's
a form of belief that is is mostly true
or it's a form of belief that's probably
true or probably Justified or partially
Justified you know where everything's
been tried along those lines
and
um
Papa
realized that the argument the the
problem of induction actually implies
that there's no such thing as Justified
knowledge in the first place and that we
do not need knowledge to be justified in
order to use it
and there is no process of justifying
a theory so theories according to Papa
are always conjecture
and thinking about theories is always
criticism it's never
a justificatory process so it's it's
always a a critical process so
uh as David Miller says uh a a theory it
doesn't need to have any special
credentials to be allowed into science
it's it's a it's a conjecture any
conjecture is allowed into science but
once it's into science it's then
criticized
and when it's criticized uh successfully
it is dropped
and uh so that's that's the that's the
that's where popper begins
then he he has to answer all the
questions you know why why
what's the rational reason for acting on
theories and and so on but but once
you've got the idea that you don't need
justification everything eventually
falls into place and it falls into place
in a structure that makes sense
and it makes sense of Science and even
Beyond science
so his solution to the problem of
induction was to sort of reframe it and
say that justification isn't needed in
the first instance for people wanting to
read a good summary of His solution to
the problem of induction would you agree
that the first chapter of his book
objective knowledge is probably the best
place to go yes many people say that I I
um
I I think it where you should start with
popper rather depends on where you're
coming from
because his uh what I've described is is
his philosophy of science narrowly
conceived but he had a very broad attack
on on different areas of philosophy
basically all the same thing it's it's
all the idea of thinking of starting
with problems rather than starting with
um you know starting with existing
theories and criticizing them
uh rather than seeking justifications
for theories
some people come to Papa via his
political philosophy though he denied
being a political philosopher
but he but he was and he was the you
know the greatest so far
um
uh so some people some people
um actually back in Cambridge
it was very hard to find proper books
in in bookshops at the time
and there was no internet and uh so
actually the first one I read was the
open society and its enemies volume two
so you know that's the only one I could
find at first and then I then I found
volume one and read that too and that
that had the only
direct connection that that had with the
philosophy of science was the in the
underlying approach and that that's what
attracted me and that's why you know I I
looked further and tried to you know
whenever I went into a Bookshop I I um
first looked for popper books in the
philosophy of philosophy section very
rarely found one
uh yeah I think
um objective knowledge is a good place
to start
or conjectures and refutations also
other people find uh interesting
um
uh
so yeah uh but but it it as I say it
depends where you're coming from
why do you think his books were so
conspicuously absent from the the
shelves of um Cambridge book shops I
don't know there is a a mystery about
poppers like reception in the academic
world
um which I don't know about in that
that's kind of the history of ideas
which which uh I'm not an expert on and
I'd I'd rather I'm more interested in
ideas than in the history of ideas
though sometimes
the one is needed for for understanding
the other but but
um
uh I know that Papa had great difficulty
especially with Oxford and Cambridge
but with the academic world generally
and he would never have come to England
as I understand it if it hadn't been for
um Hayek who was professor at the lse
um kind of uh causing the lse to create
a professorship just for Papa
um in in the uh
in in way I think it was called a
professor of the methodology of science
a professor of the scientific method
something like that and his his lectures
famously began and you can find his
first few lectures on the internet the
first one begins something like um
uh I want to uh I want to warn you that
although I am called the professor of
uh scientific methodology
and I'm the only one in the British
Empire as he put it at the time
um uh there is no such subject
there is no such thing as scientific
methodology and so on and he goes on you
know brilliantly from from there on
that's great
I've heard you recommend the myth of the
framework as as the best of his books
maybe not for beginners but certainly
for people who've already read a few of
his books why do you recommend the myth
of the framework in particular yeah well
it's it's not the book it's so many of
his books are collections of essays or
lectures like subjective whatever and
the the myth of the framework the book
is a is such a collection and what I
always recommend is the particular essay
within that book called The Myth of the
framework so the book is named after
that one essay or that one chapter
um
I think it's brilliant because it this
uh reaches out Beyond
philosophy of science philosophy of
politics to just a a general uh attack
on
I don't know what you would call it
relativism
uh including post-modernism and all
sorts of bad ideas about ideas
uh where the framework the actual myth
of the framework that he criticizes is
that
for for two people to make progress in a
discussion it is important that they
have an area of agreement
and that they locate that and then work
out from there to create agreement
now popper attacks that idea from all
directions first of all he says the
discussions can be valuable and usually
are
even if you never reach agreement
and this this is a I think a crucial
idea of poppers because again this idea
that that
um the objective of a discussion is to
reach agreement is authoritarian it's
the the idea is that you're you're
creating together a kind of authority a
kind of uniformity
um whereas in fact all we have is
conjectures and we are going to be wrong
in various ways and we're never going to
arrive at the final truth because
there's always improvements to be made
and when you
um when you have a a public controversy
like people say debates in Parliament
are useless because nobody ever changes
their mind well first of all people do
sometimes change their mind but that is
not the point
the point is that by having a debate you
improve
you're not you're you don't improve your
agreement necessarily with the other
side but you improve your understanding
of the other side you can if you are
right
you improve your own arguments
so as to be better
and
if if you think about real life you know
how people people changing their minds
about things
you can very rarely
remember a case where somebody has
changed their mind during a debate
and yet
if you look at the big picture if you
look at opinion polls about you know
would you
live next to a person of the of a
different race
you know a generation ago is like 20 of
people would and now 95 percent of
people would
and in that time
you can't find anybody who says oh right
now I've changed my mind about that or
hardly anybody
what has happened is that they check
they changed their view they changed
their view on a larger scale and on a
deeper scale including
in the first instance the type of
reasons that they give themselves for
their for their ideas so as some
somebody I I can't find this quote but
there's a marvelous quote by some moral
philosopher saying the reason we need
moral philosophy is that people change
the reasons for their behavior before
they change their behavior
that that you know you you justify it in
a different way now that you're
justifying in a different and better way
even though you're justifying the same
view and the same behavior as before
you're now changing
and eventually that will lead to your
chain changing your actual behavior in
that in that little way we were talking
about but you never see that because it
happens as as a result of a deeper shift
um so this in practice is what happens
and in theory
the theory of it is is and was first
understood I think by Papa uh and
expressed in that essay
that that quote you shared of the moral
philosopher also reminds me of that
great quote by John Stuart Mill he who
knows only his own side of the case
knows little of that right how do you
define bayesianism and why in your view
is bayesianism a form of inductivism
right well
um the word bayesianism is used for a
variety of things uh a whole spectrum of
things at one end of which
uh I have no quarrel with whatsoever and
at the other end of which I I think is
just a plain inductivism so at the good
end bayesianism is uh just
a word for
um using
a conditional probabilities
correctly
so if you want to know you know uh you
you find that your uh your Milkman uh
was born in the same small village as
you and and you know you you you
wondering what kind of a
um
a coincidence that is and so on you
you've got to uh look at the conditional
probabilities like uh rather than the
absolute probabilities
so there there isn't just one chance in
so many million but but there's a
smaller chance and then what
um against what background of of uh
population are you taking this estimate
of the chance and so on so you know you
if you're not careful you can end up uh
concluding that your Milkman is actually
stalking you
and and that's because you've used
probability wrongly so that that is one
end of the of the Spectrum which I have
no quarrel with whatsoever
at the other end of the spectrum a thing
which is called bayesianism is what I
prefer to call Bayesian epistemology
because it's the epistemology that's
wrong not the not bases theorem but
basis theorem is true enough
but uh Bayesian epistemology is just the
name of a mistake it's it's um it's a
species of inductivism and currently the
most popular species
um so the idea of Bayesian epistemology
is that first of all it it's completely
swallows the Justified true belief
um theory of knowledge
so it's saying how do we increase our
knowledge well we increase
uh we we increase our knowledge whenever
we increase our Credence for True
theories
Credence is a belief
belief is according to Bayesian
epistemology
um measured by a measure that is
basically a probability in fact all
probabilities are supposed to be these
beliefs
which is another mistake but never mind
that for a moment uh so
um uh so the idea of Science and of
thinking generally in Bayesian
epistemology is that we're trying to
increase our Credence for True beliefs
and decrease our Credence for false
beliefs
and so they use Bayes theorem to show
that when you encounter a true instance
of a general theory
your
and you use Razor's serum to calculate
the new probability of that theory the
new Credence for that theory it has gone
up
and so the basic plan of Bayesian
epistemology is that that is how
credences grow go up
um and the way they go down is if you
find a counter example
so
credences of theories go up
when you find a confirming instance and
down when you find a disconfirming
instance
and that just is inductivism that that
is another way
it's it's inductivism with a particular
measure of how strongly you believe a
theory and with a particular kind of
framework for how you justify series you
justify theories by
finding confirming instances
um so uh that is a mistake because
although it's true that the Credence of
a theory so if theories had
probabilities which they don't but if
theories had probabilities then the
probability of a theory probability or
Credence that in this in this philosophy
you they're identical
they're synonymous
um
if you find a confirming instance the
reason your Credence goes up
is because
um because
um
some of the theories that you that were
previously consistent with the evidence
are now ruled out
and so there's a deductive part of the
of the theory that that whose Credence
goes up but if you if you if you ask
apart from the deductions you can make
um
because the instances never implied a
theory so you you want to ask the part
of the theory that's not implied
logically by the evidence why does our
Credence for that go up
well unfortunately it goes down
and that's the thing that popper and
Miller proved
um in in the 1980s and I I've been I and
a colleague Matthias leonardis
um have been trying to write a paper
about this for several years to explain
um why this is so in in more
understandable terms unfortunately
popper and Miller's uh two papers on
this
are
very uh condensed and mathematical
and uh they they use uh
they use a kind of a special terminology
that they made up in order to prove this
so so the the paper hasn't been taken on
board and we would like it to be taken
on board but we haven't yet managed to
solve the problem which evidently they
didn't of how to present this
I'm curious are you aware of some of the
analogous critiques made of Bayesian
decision Theory by people like Ken
binmore
uh no
um I I
I'm not aware of having any quarrel with
Bayesian decision Theory except unless
this is referring to its ambiguity
uh that that that you never know uh
rather like the duhammed Quine ambiguity
in scientific reasoning if that's what
you're referring to then I do know about
it but I don't haven't specifically read
about it
no so I think the best place to to start
would be Ben Moore's book rational
decisions
that in the book he takes bayesianism to
man the doctrine that Bayesian decision
theory is always rational
and he builds on Leonard or Jimmy
Savage's distinction between small and
large worlds so small worlds are worlds
where you can you know look before you
leap large worlds uh worlds where you
have to cross that bridge when you come
to it so to speak and Savage argued
although everyone in you know say
economics macroeconomists seem to have
forgotten this that
Bayesian decision theory is only
applicable like it's only sensible in
small worlds in large worlds uh do you
mean
um worlds where there's a finite number
of things that you have propositions
about therefore when you find that one
of them is true you've actually made
inroads into the into the whole set
whereas for exactly things you you never
make any inroad into the whole set
exactly exactly and right and I guess
archetypal examples of large worlds are
like High Finance the macro economy
Etc
um and it just doesn't make sense to
apply Bayesian decision theory in in
large worlds
so Benmore has this um long kind of rant
against Bayesian decision Theory but he
argues that that bayesians are acting as
if they've solved the problem of
scientific induction even if they don't
explicitly acknowledge that
um I agree that they are and I agree
that that's that's an error
so
why is the future of civilization
unpredictable in principle
um
because
future knowledge because
it's going to be affected by Future
knowledge
and future knowledge is unpredictable
so uh if you if you think well the
example I give uh in in my book
um is is that if you've been trying to
predict the future of
um of energy production in 1900
um you wouldn't have
included
nuclear energy because uh radioactivity
had only just been discovered in 1900
and it wasn't known that it could be
used to produce energy
so then
um and and there was no way of
predicting that it was going nuclear
energy was going to be discovered
because if you had predicted that that
would be equivalent to already
predicting it in 1900 so that's a
logical contradiction you you you can't
know knowledge that you don't know
so uh now I suppose you've been
magically told that there would be
nuclear energy then you you might have
predicted that okay carbon dioxide is
not going to build up in the atmosphere
um uh because we will have by the mid of
the middle of the um 20th century we're
going to have nuclear power and we won't
have any use for fossil fuels or you
know much less use for fossil fuels
anymore so so there won't be global
warming and so you you could predict
that there won't be global warming on
the basis of the knowledge in best
knowledge known in 1900 but it was not
known in 1900 that in the mid 20th
century there would be an environmental
movement that would stigmatize nuclear
energy
and so on uh and and so at each stage
you don't know what the future of
knowledge and but these examples
illustrate that knowledge can be
erroneous as well so that that's is
another thing that popper took seriously
that false theories also contain
knowledge
and uh so this is
um
uh that this is a nice example to show
that it's impossible to know the future
that's going to be affected by knowledge
now
is the future you know which parts of
the future are going to be affected by
knowledge or not
well that's also unknowable
so uh you know we we predict the orbit
of Mars but the orbit of Mars is is only
going to be our prediction is only going
to be correct if nothing intervenes so
human knowledge could intervene we we
might create the knowledge to shift Mars
and we might want to shift Mars for some
reason or another and in the next 100
years or thousand years or million years
we might want to do that and whether we
do it or not depends on the knowledge we
create and that knowledge not just
scientific knowledge but also all other
forms of knowledge that moral knowledge
uh political knowledge aesthetic
knowledge uh all those might
um affect
the orbit of Mars in the future
so
but that doesn't mean that it's
completely useless
because uh to to uh try and predict
anything
because we have explanations we have ex
so we what I've just said is not just a
conditional prediction it's also an
explanation because I've I've have been
saying that it would need some
um extreme
changes in The Human Condition
for human knowledge to affect Mars
whereas if you talk about human
knowledge affecting let's say the
atmosphere
um then then there's uh
the the the best explanatory theories we
have are already that human knowledge is
if affecting the atmosphere now and will
affect it more in the future now that
might be false both those things might
be false
but every particular theory about how it
can be false is
subject to criticism and has failed
criticism so our our best explanatory
theories about the future say that the
atmosphere is being affected and will be
affected by more in the future and we
um
we can therefore conclude that given
what we want from the atmosphere we
would we would do best to create the
knowledge to make it change in the way
we want
so is the k
point of differentiation between
legitimate prediction and illegitimate
prophecy that legitimate predictions
rely on good explanations exactly
and but but the legitimate predictions
are not
Justified knowledge
they are they are conjectures just like
everything else it's just that their
Rivals have failed criticism which
doesn't mean they're false they have
just failed criticism and the rational
way of proceeding is to proceed
according to the best explanation and
they are of course subject to
disappointment yes
so for most of our species history
knowledge was sparse and grew slowly if
at all yes does this mean that that
people could have made better
predictions about the near futures of
their societies than we can of ours for
example would it have been easier for
someone in Ming China to make
predictions about the future of their
civilization than it is for a 21st
century American to make predictions
about the future of the United States
yes and how how could people in the past
have known exante that they're seemingly
static circumstances endowed them with
this predictive power without
extrapolating their circumstances
forward
um
the Assumption was it's not just any old
prediction it the Assumption was that
nothing would change
now sooner or later that that
um assumption is going to be proved
false in almost all cases it was proof
false by the destruction of that Society
That civilization almost all
civilizations that have ever existed
have been static until they were
destroyed either by
um nature or by other humans
so
um
whether you call that reliability of
prediction or not it is a matter of
taste you know if if you're in an Empire
that's that in fact is going to last for
450 years
and you're at the 200 year mark and you
you predict well nothing's going to ever
change
then you can predict that you know your
the kind of diseases that you have now
are still going to be experienced by
your great great grandchildren
um
until you're wrong you know until it
comes to the 400 year mark and your
great great grandchildren are going to
be have it much much worse than you or
much much better than you
so it depends how you how you how you
calibrate predictability in a static
Society
you can make predictions conditional on
the survival of the static Society
whether or not you know that that you're
making them conditionally
in a dynamic Society it's much easier to
see
that your predictions
um it's the other way around like given
that your Society is going to survive
the future is opaque so to come back to
good explanations there are there are
some quotes in the beginning of infinity
that could potentially be misconstrued
as prophecies so I just wanted to to
give you the opportunity to clarify them
so for example on page 455 of the
paperback you talk about how humans will
achieve immortality within the next few
lifetimes and I imagine that someone
might pounce on that and say ah David's
contradicting himself that's a prophecy
but I suppose you're a taught would be
that there's like a good explanation
underlying that claim is that fair to
say uh I can't remember the wording it's
it's perfectly possible that that I uh
worded it in a way that was either
ambiguous or plain wrong
so if I said humans are going to solve
this problem within uh X years then
um that is a prophecy and I shouldn't
have put it that way
now uh uh if I said I expect this to
happen then that technically escapes the
the criticism of Prophecy but it depends
on the context if I expect it can can be
taken in context to mean I predict
then it is a mistake and I shouldn't
have said it
um but if it's a description of
um my my personal conjecture
of what's going to happen then it's
accurate and and I think it's so it is
based on an explanation but the
explanation is
um a kind of an in a negative form
at present I see nothing in our and in
our existing best theories of biology
that that suggest that
um uh that there's a law of physics that
says that the lifetime has to be has
have a particular finite limit we know
that there are organisms that don't have
that limit
so so that like like
um
most microorganisms and so on and
um uh the
processes that we know that kill people
are all of the form
um something goes wrong physically which
we can see and which we could undo if we
had the knowledge so it might not be
true it might be that there's some deep
reason yet to be discovered
why humans can never be immortal
um whereby Immortal I mean uh you know
the the
aging won't kill us but you know
something else might kill us
um so uh
all if that comment in my book said that
nothing is known that that that
um mandates that
then it's not prophecy
but if I accidentally phrased it as a
prophecy then I'm wrong uh you know I
uh papyrians shouldn't be so embarrassed
about being wrong
it's very very honorable of you one of
my favorite uh genres David is old books
about the future
I like reading about how people in the
past thought about the future and I sort
of collect these books mainly to remind
myself not to prophesy but some of the
ones I have sitting on my bookshelf
downstairs are toward the year 2018
which was published in 1968. there's
Lester thoreau's book head to head he
was an MIT I think political scientists
and it was a 1993 book that envisioned
Japan and Europe as America's great
economic rivals in the 21st century
scarcely making mention of China
there's certain schreiber's book The
American challenge which envisioned
American growth sort of continuing very
aggressively into the 21st century there
is uh Khan and winners book the year
2000 which speculated on all of these
future technologies that we would have
there is of course ehrlix the population
bomb there's limits to growth there's a
book called The Coming war with Japan by
Friedman and lebard but I'm curious do
you have any of your own examples of of
favorite examples of failed predictions
or doomsang books that pan it turned out
to be false well some of those uh uh I
have actually read or at least seen
um some of those that you mentioned
others are completely new to me I
haven't heard of uh many of them
um
I was recently rereading 20 000 Leagues
Under the Sea
and
um I'm not familiar with it oh Jules
Verne a science fiction book written
about 1870 something like that and uh
it's amazing the things he gets utterly
wrong and and the things he gets
amazingly correct
um you know electric light
um submarines
um uh and some of the things he he gets
very very wrong I I saw there a a nice
um
uh uh so Antarctica
it wasn't known at the time where the
Antarctica was land or frozen sea like
the like the Arctic region
so
um in this book they go in a submarine
and they go and try and find the South
Pole to see if it can be reached under
the ice
and uh he gives a wonderful argument
for why
there must be a continent there and not
just ice
and he says
um
near the South Pole
there are far more icebergs than there
are near the North Pole
and icebergs can only form from glaciers
which are on land
the glacias in the northern hemisphere
form in places like Greenland on and so
on but not in the Arctic itself
that's why there are fewer of them
and and therefore we must expect there
to be an Antarctic landmass
and well I thought you know that's just
so typical of explanatory reasoning that
there's no induction there there's no uh
you know uh we found continents
everywhere else therefore there should
be one in in Antarctica as well it's an
explanatory Theory
it's it's explaining the phenomenon of
icebergs by something that absolutely
isn't icebergs
it's it's uh it's a land mass in the in
the middle of the Southern Ocean that's
never been discovered
and that's brilliant and uh I don't know
whether it's even true I don't know what
I know I haven't looked it up I don't
know whether there are more icebergs in
the southern hemisphere uh I guess it
must be true by the same argument you
know I I now uh my best guess is that it
is true
um
so uh you asked for examples of
predictions or prophecies that turned
out to be false well well I'm more
impressed by the ones that turned out to
be true you know they're they're
they
um
uh
uh oh yeah yes he predicts that
um
that on the same trip he predicts that
in the future
um hunting whales will be made illegal
and this is 1870.
um or something like that
um so uh yeah um
I think one thing that's happened is
that between the 19th and 20th Century
speculative fiction science fiction
uh turned pessimistic
that the 19th century was more
optimistic and when people speculated
about the future they're more likely to
have been wrong
um by overestimating progress than by
underestimating it
in the 20th century
there was a sort of congealing of the
intellectual climate into a very rigid
pessimism so that a a a prediction or
prophecy could only be taken seriously
if it was negative
um so
um there's another book I thought you
might mention
um I don't know exactly when it was
written but I remember it coming out
called will the Soviet Union survive
until 1984
uh and this was like in the 70s and and
his answer was
no or rather you know it will survive
until approximately 1984 then it will
collapse
I remember this being vilified
um
basically on the grounds that it was
sort of arrogant to assume that the West
has it all right and and the the
um uh the the the the the there's
nothing viable in the Soviet system and
this is just arrogance on our part and
so on where it's not true the the book
was just giving explanatory arguments
about why this edifice could not survive
and he was only five years out
um uh it turned out to be correct but he
at the time was was
um vilified
you you mentioned that switch from
optimistic to pessimistic visions of the
future
you know where you've you've got in the
first half of the 20th century like
Isaac Asimov speculating about how
wonderful the future could be and then
by the second half of the 20th century
you've got you know movies like
Terminator and you mentioned that that
shift may have been
um caused by this congealing
intellectual environment around
pessimism yes um
I'm not sure if I'm offering an
alternative explanation or adding to
what you've said but
what do you think of the idea that that
economic and productivity growth began
to slow for whatever reason or reasons
around say 1972 73 and prior to that
where we had this amazing period of
growth people were kind of extrapolating
that into the future
and so it made sense to be talking about
flying cars only a few decades away
because
people had just gone from you know
almost nothing to electricity telephones
radios
flight but when when that growth started
to slow the the pessimism kind of kicked
in does that make sense to you I think
that happened but I I don't think uh
it's it's how can I put it I I don't
think there's an
inexorable uh evolution in this thing I
I think it happened because of specific
mistakes that that got embedded in
systems
um particularly uh the academic world
and and
um
government governmental bureaucracy
um and from there into the wider Society
so that uh
um again the idea that
uh
that
uh how can I put it that that
um
there's something wrong with aspiring to
make radical improvements
that this is hubris or that this is
dangerous or that this will inevitably
have side effects
um this
um
this idea
is very widespread that various versions
of this idea are very widespread and
they have caused
um a Slowdown in various areas of course
not in all areas you've only got to look
at computers to see that that rapid
Improvement was happened during that
entire so-called period of stagnation
um but
but many things
in in many areas improvements
drastically declined
so decline not to zero so we still have
Improvement all the time but we don't
have rapid Improvement we don't have
um rapid uh game changes happening
anymore
and I think that's completely
unnecessary and could be turned round if
people change their attitude
yeah I mean that's a very optimistic
interpretation I would like to believe
that that is true that there's just
something wrong in the culture
um some kind of
um you know mental
um mental problems like I guess that we
can sort of tweak and get ourselves back
on track that would be
um much better than thinking that we'd
sort of somehow picked all the
low-hanging fruits or something like
that yeah I know it's right that is the
epitome of the wrong Theory
uh I mean I I you know I'm a physicist
and so I I can I can judge that in the
context of physics people have
said and I think the prevailing view is
that the reason physics fundamental
physics progress has slowed down is that
we've picked all the lower hanging fruit
but that's not true it's there's there's
more low-hanging fruit than there ever
was seen before it's just that picking
it is stigmatized
that speculative fiction book from the
1870s you mentioned do you remember the
the author's explanation for why he
thought whale hunting would be outlawed
in the future
uh
no I mean he says something like that
that whales have large brains and uh
something like that I I forget but but
he was not at all opposed to uh hunting
um sea creatures or land creatures you
know he he's quite quite okay with with
um
with uh that there's a scene where where
they they have these they they encounter
these these uh other Predators who are
going to prey on the whales and they're
going basically literally make mince
meat of them
and he's he describes this in in gleeful
tones
so it's it's not that he's against
hunting he's against whale hunting in
particular
right interesting so
for you a good explanation is an
explanation that is hard to vary while
still explaining what it purports to
explain yes
but hard to vary by what standard
um
ultimately the standard is that
conjectures that have been put forward
or which which are
on the horizon for being put forward
have been refuted and what's more they
have been refuted in such a way that
um they
um
it's not just that the particular
theories have been refuted it's it's
that their underlying assumption have
have been argued away when I say refuted
I meant in this context
argued away that that uh nothing like
that could happen because
if we were to find somehow a theory with
that property
that for example
um
that that in in reality
um the Earth is flat and that it it just
looks round because light travels in Us
in in not in straight lines or something
like that then that would spoil all
sorts of other explanations which those
theories the flatter theories do not
address
and it it looks as though they can't
address them now just because it looks
as though they can't address them
doesn't mean they can't but we can't
switch to a theory that isn't a good
explanation because a theory that isn't
a good explanation is obviously false
it's like you know I'm not gonna step
into uh the path of moving traffic on
the motorway because it looks as though
I'd be mashed by the next car that's
coming along now it's no good saying
well you might be wrong yes of course I
might be wrong it might all be a
hologram and everything but I can't
uh it's not rational to make decisions
on the basis of what might be true
it's rational to make decisions on the
basis of what looks as though it's true
in the sense that the contrary Theory
looks false
uh yeah do you mind if I just make
myself a cup of tea yeah absolutely I
might get a water while you're doing it
yeah because my voice is going so uh
unless
unless I lubricate it
right I'm back great yes you were saying
yes a few more questions about
prediction so
in his book The precipice the Australian
philosopher Toby ORD takes a Bayesian
approach to quantifying existential
risks to humanity he he adds up the
chance of various existential
catastrophes befalling Us in the next
100 years and reaches a rough overall
estimate the chance of an existential
catastrophe befalling Humanity in the
next 100 years is one in six he stresses
that it's not you know a precise
estimate but he thinks it's the right
order of magnitude
and the one in six estimate takes into
account our responses to escalating
risks
question for you David should we use
base rates like that to estimate the
probability of existential risks and
help prioritize which ones we address
um basically absolutely not
um we should not but I have to qualify
that by saying that in some cases
um
the probabilities uh
can be known because they are the the
result of good explanations
so uh for example
we can calculate the probability
um that an asteroid from the asteroid
belt
will hit the earth in in the next
thousand years or something
unfortunately we can't
we don't know the probability that an
asteroid from somewhere else from the
Oort cloud or or from somewhere outside
the plane of the ecliptic or from
elsewhere in the Galaxy or from another
galaxy so we don't know any of those
probabilities there's no way of
estimating them
so there is no way of using Bayesian
reasoning to address them
I should also say another caveat is that
because of the grip that Bayesian
epistemology has on the intellectual
world at the moment
people often phrase
good arguments
in Bayesian terms in order to give them
the appearance of of being strong
arguments whereas in fact they're
already strong arguments they don't need
bayesianism to justify them and so what
you tend to get is a mixture of good
arguments disguised as Bayesian
epistemology with bad arguments that
actually use raising epistemology
Toby old's book
um
uh I haven't read it all uh but it it it
definitely makes this mistake of
bayesianism in both senses
that is a lot of the book is good
argument
um and and good proposals
but but some of it is just
um uh lost behind the the mist of
Prophecy Nick bostrom's vulnerable World
hypothesis is the hypothesis that
there's some level of Technology at
which civilization almost certainly gets
destroyed unless quite extraordinary and
historically unprecedented degrees of
preventive policing or Global governance
implemented so in simple terms you know
the cost of destructive Technologies for
and we have a diverse set of motivations
in the population like there'll always
be a few crazy or malevolent people and
it's a near inevitability that those
people use those destructive
Technologies to destroy civilization
are you familiar with bostrom's
vulnerable World hypothesis I I disagree
with both the conclusion and the
argument
um right
um though again you know Bostrom is a
wonderful writer and a lot of the things
he says are very true
uh if if you've read his his letter
from the future
to the present uh that's the most
uplifting thing I've ever read I I think
and highly optimistic yeah
um but I I think the the argument uh
about
um
technology and the dangers of technology
is just wrong
so he has this analogy of the of the urn
from which one takes uh white white
beads and black beads occasionally there
are black beads and the white ones are
and these are technological discoveries
and the white ones are ones that are
beneficial and the black ones are the
ones that destroy us
and sooner or later we're going to hit
the black one and that unless we take
drastic steps to make sure that first of
all we take them out more rarely and
second that we examine them very closely
before before actually deploying them
and uh I think this is a recipe for
totalitarianism but even worse it's a
recipe for
um it's precisely a recipe for
um civilization to be destroyed
um because civilization is only going to
be rescued by rapid growth of knowledge
whether or not we take totalitarian
Draconian steps to try to rein it in
uh the in terms of the analogy the
mistake is that every time we take out a
white
um bead we reduce the number of black
beads
so the so the the probability
calculation that's implicit in that in
that metaphor is a mistake we become
more resilient the more we know
uh about
especially fundamental knowledge because
fundamental knowledge can protect us
from things that we don't yet know about
uh unlike specifically directed
knowledge which has less of that
tendency
so um
uh secondly it's not true that that
um technology has made us more more
vulnerable
because
um
we are
the our species depending on how you
count species our species Homo sapiens
sapiens
um is
um
the terminology is changing too fast to
keep track of it but but you know our
species is one of uh six or eight or or
maybe more species that that had the
capacity to create explanatory knowledge
we know that because uh things like
campfires uh require explanatory
knowledge to
um to form them we know from the
evolution of language language must have
been used before the structures in our
throat adapted to make language
um evolved it must have been the
language you use that made them evolve
it couldn't possibly have happened the
other way around so we know that all
these other species existed in the past
and were capable of what we are namely
creating new explanatory knowledge and
they are all extinct except us and we
know that our species almost went
extinct at least once but probably more
than once in our past as well
so
um
uh if we come nearer
every civilization before the
civilization we called the West
uh now you know technological
civilization or every civilization
before technological civilization was
also destroyed some of them after 4 000
years but fourth I think that's the
longest a civilization has ever survived
you know depending on where you draw the
line but you know between its creation
and what people regard as its
destruction destruction of the knowledge
that kept it going
um that's nothing compared with the
lifetime of a species
and uh all those civilizations have been
destroyed as well
and all of them could have been all
those species and all those
civilizations could have been saved with
just a little more knowledge
by from our perspective a little more
knowledge about about
um you know hygiene to prevent uh
plagues and and
um
uh farming and and
um irrigation and that kind of thing to
prevent being destroyed by climate
change and so on
so a small amount of knowledge would
have saved them and on the other hand
not a single civilization
was destroyed through creating too much
scientific knowledge
so that's never happened so so if you're
going to be Bay Bayesian
and or if you're going to pull these
these beads out of a hat then even by
that standard
um we should be pulling them out faster
not slower
now and as for the the idea that a small
number of people could destroy
civilization well yes uh but that's
that's not the right measure
we have a small number of people who
could work on things that could destroy
civilization but we have a large number
of people that could be working on
countermeasures
now you know it could be argued and I
think there's a very good argument for
this that we are not doing enough of
that that is we're not doing enough to
uh counteract
um
artificially caused pandemics for
example
or as as Carl Sagan put it
artificially caused
um
meteor strikes
now and he said we shouldn't be
developing the technology for fending
off
um
asteroids or comets because it could
also be used to destroy us now I think
that's a mistake we should be developing
that technology and we should be
developing it faster and it's again this
is something that's actually going in
the right direction because
um say 20 years ago the idea of an
asteroid defense system was ridiculed it
was literally ridiculed and rejected
just for being ridiculed whereas in that
time we have set up a rudimentary
asteroid detection system which can
detect asteroids and also there's been
Research into how to fend them off when
we do detect them now they will not fend
off
asteroids coming from a unexpected
Direction outside the plane of the uh
ecliptic nor faster than we expect you
know that we we could
be vulnerable to those
just because we don't have a fleet of
nuclear-powered spaceships
and we're going to be kicking ourselves
if one of those heads towards us and we
don't have the nuclear powered
spaceships and it's going to take us
more than you know whatever it is a year
to build them
now you know I don't know what we could
do if our lives depended on it
uh you know we we could we could I I
guess we could do like we did with the
present pandemic we could do things that
were thought impossible previously
but there's a level of things that we
couldn't do
and and we should we should be
if not making the fleet we should be
creating the knowledge to make the fleet
of nuclear-powered spaceships and all
sorts of other things and as I said the
most important knowledge in this respect
is fundamental knowledge
and fundamental knowledge is created by
things like fundamental science
fundamental science has been held back
by the phenomenon we discussed before
that the academic world has been
um
uh trapped in a in a sort of sargasso
sea of of uh bad assumptions which have
um
de-emphasized fundamental research in
favor of incremental research
uh and have uh the science funding
system uh doesn't work and the the ref
um peer review system doesn't work and
it it all goes together to
um increase the number of scientists
um doing things that won't save
civilization and reduce the number
working on things that will
I wanted to ask you this before but what
practical steps would you take to
improve the incentives for fundamental
research over incremental research
um
well I'm not an expert on science
funding and the reason for that is that
that in part that that I have
tried to get away from the entire system
the entire academic system from funding
uh down to academic politics and so on I
I don't have a position an official
position at any University and I'm not
paid by by anybody to do research I uh
you know I write my books and uh and I'm
I am an honorary member of various
things in Oxford University but not a
paid member so I don't know
and how things are going I only know the
complaints that my colleagues raise and
they are all the same complaints that
that um
uh uh funding
um
is highly bureaucratic at the moment so
if you have a an idea for some research
you want to do you've got to submit it
to a committee the the committee
consists of 20 people none of whom are
experts in fields close to yours
or even if they are they've they've got
a vested interest in not doing that kind
of research but in in directing it
towards their kind of research
which is only natural now it used to be
even in you know when I was a student
it used to be that research funding was
not done in that way research funding I
don't know how the higher levels of it
worked but it was directed towards
individual senior researchers and they
disbursed the funds and chose their own
um graduate students and postdocs
to do the research that they thought was
important and those of them who thought
that fundamental research was important
didn't have like particular projects
that they wanted they they were looking
for young people who had ideas to do
fundamental research that that was
certainly true of the bosses that I had
when I was a student and when I was a
postdoc now that doesn't seem to exist
anymore
um now it's it's the
scientific Department that has its
priorities and which tells the
professors what to do and the professors
we have we had some ridiculous
situations a couple of years ago where
we wanted to hire
um
uh well one example was we wanted to
hire a a postdoc
to work on foundations of constructive
theory and the reason we wanted to hire
him is that that he had he was the only
person in the world who had proved a
particular theorem and we wanted him to
use his techniques anyway it was
impossible to hire him because we had to
advertise his position
and then make a case to the relevant
committee and what did they know about
it there is you know there wasn't a box
on on the form
there wasn't a there wasn't a box called
Constructor Theory
because Constructor Theory doesn't exist
yet
the the whole point was that we're
trying to create this new field
and the reason it doesn't exist yet is
is that
it's it may not exist at all it's a
fundamental conjecture
but it's a fundamental conjecture that
is thought worthwhile by me and several
other senior people
that should be enough to fund something
and that the same thing has happened
with with uh graduate students and the
it's ridiculous by the way that that in
in at least in the parts of the funding
system that I see
um
uh if you're a young person wanting to
do research on a particular thing in a
particular Department you've got to
apply to the funding for the funding in
one place typically the government or
some giant charity or something like
that and to get into the apartment the
the department
in a different place
so you you and so it can happen that the
like like an example I gave the
department really wants you but there's
no funding
so sometimes the the the the senior
people can arrange a weird Arrangement
where you're funded for one thing but
you're really going to do another thing
and and I I think in general people who
apply for Grants nowadays are are
playing a game it you know you're gaming
the system you're you're trying to take
as many of the boxes as you can and
you're trying to pretend that your
research is directed towards those boxes
whereas it actually it only satisfies
the boxes incidentally and it's really
directed towards something else that
couldn't get funding now you know so I
shouldn't go on and on about this
because this is only a tiny facet
of the overall problem
um people like
um
Michael Nielsen and Patrick Collison uh
have investigated the problem at a at a
deeper level
they are inclined to to
they have much more sympathy with the
lower hanging fruit Theory than than it
deserves but at least they've gone into
the the problem in a broader sense than
I have so you know you should ask them
yeah there's also a great book by Donald
braben called scientific Freedom have
you come across that
no
I'd recommend uh that to people as well
I think stripe press recently um Patrick
Collison's um Publishing House recently
republished it
um but yeah I'm I'm just getting
frustrated listening to you just feels
like we're we're self-sabotaging as a
species yes and and the um of course the
bad guys have no such restrictions
right there's an asymmetry yeah
yeah but really the the natural
asymmetry is the other way around you
know that the good guys have a natural
advantage in this game but not if we
hogtie ourselves exactly
a couple more questions on prediction
and probability yeah are you familiar
with Phil tetlock's research on
forecasting no and no okay afraid not
I'll I'll skip over that then
do you have any explanations as to why
frequencies in certain situations can be
approximated by probabilities yes it's
it's because there is a an underlying
physical process
for which if we have good explanations
of that process we can use frequencies
to predict probabilities
but not otherwise
and the usual case is otherwise
that is the usual case is that the
frequencies are misleading especially
when something important depends on it
why do you think it took people so long
to come up with probability Theory
humans were gambling long before cardano
the math isn't particularly difficult oh
I think the maths is quite difficult I
mean if you're going back to cardano
um uh you know it was it was only a
couple of centuries before that that
Europe switched from
uh Roman numerals
and and using uh letters for algebra
so uh you know if you look at uh how
people like Kepler
expressed theories it was it was
amazingly uh cumbersome
um but
people like Kepler
um
you know people like Galileo
were
taken down by the system as it were as
it was then
so as bronowski says the the after
Galileo
um
scientific research in southern Europe
came to a dead stop
but it continued in in northern Europe
and then then we had the leibniz and and
Newton and Descartes and so on and they
they had their problems with authorities
but but uh they were relatively free to
to pursue ideas and they had fundamental
ideas and
um I don't think it's at all surprising
that they didn't invent the the
probability Theory wasn't invented
earlier
um
when probability theory was first
invented
um by cardano and Pascal and those
people from that
um uh it
it wasn't misused
it it it wasn't used in the same way as
today it was I think
understood by all concern that this was
a theory of
how to make a profit playing games
where the process of randomizing was
always part of the explanation of why
you should take the fact that you know
three Aces have already been dealt that
that changes the probability of the
fourth Ace
that that this was based on a physical
understanding of the situation
where
a randomized a randomizing process had
approximated probabilities
and nobody would have I think nobody
would have tried to use this for
predicting things like
um
you know whether there's going to be
another continent in in an uninhabited
uh unexplored part of the world
they they wouldn't have done that
because they would have they would only
have been
expecting probability to have these
narrow rain this narrow range of uses
and it was only in the I don't know
again I'm not a historian of ideas but I
think it was only roughly the the middle
of the 20th century
when
um
people like Jane's and so on started
advocating a much broader no no it was
before that I think there were there was
already the beginnings of it in the 19th
century but anyway a much broader
interpretation of probability
subjective interpretation of probability
is or by the way I haven't mentioned
this
these bad interpretations of probability
are all subjective including Bayesian
epistemology
that they're all thinking that
probability is not an attribute of the
pack of cards it's an attribute of how
we think of about the pack of cards and
that's a terrible mistake which popper
attacks as well
uh I mean he's he's against subjective
interpretations of anything
except psychology itself speaking of of
subjective probabilities and I know you
are more interested in I the ideas
themselves than the history of ideas but
just as an aside
um
people often go back to Frank Ramsey
um when thinking about the birth of
subjective probability but it was
recently when reading Papa
um that God it was an objective
knowledge it was so it's for people who
have the book it's page 79 of objective
knowledge it's the the second essay two
faces of Common Sense
but there's a footnote
um of poppers the theory is often
ascribed to Frank Ramsey but it can be
found in Kent
um and I got to be excited when I read
that because I um I do get a bit
sidetracked
um indulging in the history of ideas
um I agree with you that that it's it's
I find it useful to the extent that it
helps you understand the ideas
themselves and kind of the the debate
between different ideas
um even if only is like a a memory
device I suppose
um
and yeah I went back to um kant's
critique of pure reason and sure enough
in there he talks about using bets to
quantify subjective probabilities oh
really I didn't know all the way back to
Kent yeah yeah it's not surprising I
guess because he was really into
subjective interpretation of knowledge
in general
yeah but um I was like wow that that's
um a great pickup by by Carl yeah
um
so the the last question I wanted to ask
you David was
um I I really something I I just started
thinking while we've been talking and
that is I wonder whether you see
the cultural malaise that's been
afflicting science
um and the the kind of careerism and
incrementalism as being a tall a cause
of the continued and perhaps increasing
popularity of Bayesian epistemology
because
I guess with Bayesian epistemology you
can kind of keep like tinkering with
existing theories rather than coming up
with fundamentally new ones
um so sociology is another kind of thing
that I'm not particularly interested in
you know I I I I don't want to
uh
psychologize or second guess why people
make the mistakes that they do I I would
rather
think that Bayesian epistemology
is just one facet of a much larger thing
so it's not that bayesianism has caused
all the trouble in the world it's that
all the trouble in the world has caused
raising epistemology
however it is striking that that
based in in Bayesian epistemology
um
it's all about increasing the authority
of a theory
which in the big picture is all about
increasing Authority which means that
there's you know let's follow the
science as as recently people have been
saying about the pandemic and so on as
if science had had some Authority had a
moral Authority or a finality or an
indisputableness
about it and at the same time
it undervalues Bayesian personality that
is
undervalues criticism because the only
kind of crit so everything is focused in
bezen epistemology of in increasing our
Credence for something
and okay we have a refutation that
reduces it to zero
so it's a kind of structuralist
um conception of how
um theories can fail
uh the uh according to that theory they
they fail all at once and when they are
refuted by experiment whereas in reality
in the papyrian conception
science isn't it consists entirely of
criticism or rather of conjecture which
is which is a a thing that we don't know
how to model but
that theories don't have a source other
than conjecture and the whole rich
um content of scientific reasoning comes
in criticism
a small part of which is
inventing experiments and doing them but
most criticism is structural criticism
of the theory qua explanation
and most theories are rejected for being
bad explanations rather than actually
refuted and even when there is an
apparent refutation
um
uh we don't take it seriously unless
there's an explanation for it again my
my example I gave gave in my book is the
fuss that was made
when some people thought that they'd
found neutrinos that travel faster than
light
and uh
they were thinking oh general relativity
is refuted and and and so on and uh
actually
the explanation was that that there was
a faulty connector in in some of their
Electronics and that was it that was
that was the whole explanation for the
for the neutrinos appearing to travel
faster than light now
um this is the Durham coin uh critique
of Science in general
it does not apply to papyrian
epistemology but it does apply to
bayesianism uh and
um uh because in bayesianism you never
know whether there's uh whether your
credence
for the
Integrity of the experiment should be
reduced or your Credence for the theory
should be reduced bayesianism Bayesian
epistemology
doesn't give a Criterion for which of
those to choose
and nor does popular in epistemology but
Barbarian epistemology has an
alternative uh account of what you
should be doing
um namely trying to find explanations
and then when you found the explanations
it's not that your probability or your
Credence for them changes it's that uh
their Rivals become bad explanations
and that's how we make progress yes
David Deutsch thanks so much for your
time uh it's been fun nice chatting
thank you so much for listening I hope
you enjoyed that conversation as much as
I did for show notes and the episode
transcript head to my website
thejspod.com that's the jspod.com until
next time thank you for listening ciao
[Music]
[Applause]